Strategy
========

Even when measuring and having data, people are still a key component of
the strategy to deploy metrics and to have a driven-data process change.
Metrics that lead to a process improvement or a motivational change are
needed to be understood and approved by those that will be tracked. And
there is not a need to measure everything, but to focus on specific
areas of developers work that help to understand if this is working.

In addition to all of this, the metrics strategy is directly linked to
the general purpose of the process update. From time to time
organizations update their goals and those goals force a change in the
metrics used to parse how far the organization is from those goals.

Thus, there are two main components in this process: goals and people.
And developers must be aligned with the goals of the organization so
everyone is walking the same path to success.

Developers and middle management should be part of the process to
understand what the useful metrics are, to help to reject useless
metrics and improve the metrics cycle. This will also help to introduce
a data-driven development cycle and let the developers feel comfortable
when using them.

When using metrics in InnerSource, we have already detailed the
following purposes:

-   Awareness: be aware of the work in progress

-   Process Improvement: detect issues and understand the root causes of
    those issues (look for bottlenecks of your current process).

-   Motivational: let the development team follow some track (e.g.,:
    foster new contributions to a new project)

A usual way to apply a new methodology consists of following the PDCA
(Plan-Do-Check-Act) to continuously improve. The steps ‘Plan’ and
‘Check’’ are the interesting ones for this metrics chapter, while the
others are application of improvements in the process (‘Do’) and
decision making (‘Act’).

The Planning actions consists of understanding the current situation of
the process within the organization. For this and from a metrics point
of view, it is necessary to retrieve qualitative and quantitative
information. Quantitative in the sense of measuring what is taking place
in the current development team and understand how developers and middle
management use the infrastructure and interact among them. This will
help to have a first glimpse of the situation of the project in a given
moment in time.

From a qualitative point of view, feedback from developers and middle
management is also necessary as they understand how the current process
actually works. This is expected to fill the gap left by the
quantitative approach and will help to understand if metrics are useful
for their daily work, from a more managerial point of view or if they
are useless at all for them.

Finally, it is necessary to define the goals, questions and metrics that
will help to understand how much improvement we had when applying new
policies in the software development process and other areas. Those
metrics can also be linked to some actions such as alerts when the
software process is not evolving as expected. And those alerts should
end in actions or decisions in the ‘Act’ step.

Summarizing: qualitative and quantitative feedback, definition of goals
and questions that will be checked later to measure success and tracking
of the current situation of the project at the point of initiating this
process.

Once the metrics and KPI’s were defined, the ‘Do’ step will take some
weeks or months of work where developers work in a certain situation
with some specific conditions. The ‘Check’ step will help to determine
if this process was successful enough depending on the original goals
defined at the ’Plan’ step. We may have improved the performance of the
development model, but if the goal of this cycle was to attract more
developers, we would have failed.

On top of this, the application of different policies or actions may
take place in parallel and with different projects. Let’s take the
example of selecting a new governance model for three different inner
source projects: benevolent dictator, pure meritocracy where developers
can work on their own and a mixing model of meritocracy but where
developers are guided in the type of tasks they can work on.

This may help to follow a testing process where the governance model can
be tested in small scale and the most successful govern later exported
to others. This test A/B may help to understand the best governance
model in certain circumstances. And having qualitative and quantitative
feedback from the people involved in the process and the data sources
they used provide great insights about the performance of the several
models.
