Introduction
============

It was 2011 when Marc Andreessen wrote his famous article, “Why Software
is eating the World”[^1]. By that time, Linux Kernel was already 20
years old, developed under an open collaborative model by hundreds of
developers from different companies, and some even contributing during
their spare time. Linux can be found in almost any kind of device, from
IoT and car components, to super computing cloud hardware, without
forgetting one of the most used mobile operating systems in the market.

And Linux is just one example of how a free, open source software (OSS)
project has evolved from one single idea in one single person’s head to
multiple applications in many different fields and sectors. Each
application has improved it over time, thanks to its open collaborative
development methodology.

Almost 6 years later, we can assure that free, open source sofwtare
(OSS) projects have succed in the IT development ecosystem. We can see
companies adopting OSS technologies and people contributing to OSS from
different companies and even during their spare time.

How has OSS reached the level of innovation we have nowadays? How has it
reached the market acceptance we see nowdays? How has it engaged so many
people and organizations to contribute to it?

It’s a teamwork effort and quoting John Wooden (former UCLA Bruins
basketball coach) in IBM Linux comercial [^2]:

“A player who makes a team great is more valuable than a great player.
Losing yourself in the group for the good of the group, that’s
teamwork.”

The Digital Transformation hype
-------------------------------

During the same period of time, many companies have started facing what
they call their “Digital Transformation”, to become software omnichannel
companies[^3]. They become heavy IT users and the key transformation
steps usually are defined by

-   breaking cross-organizational silos (cultural change)

-   adoption new IT technologies (cloud, big data, mobile, etc.)

The adoption of these technologies usually means that companies need
people and companies to build strong and competent “DevOps”[^4] teams.
Yes, “DevOps”, the second hype-word after “Digital Transformation” of
these ages.

“DevOps teams” share some principles with collaborative development
teams in the open source world. As first described by John Willis and
Damon Edwards in 2010, CALMS, standing for Culture (collaboration),
Automation, Lean, Measurement, and Sharing to describe the “DevOps
framework”, obviously contains terms familar to any open source
developer.

These teams usually develop custom software solutions and deployment
recipes for their companies. For small, medium enterprises (SME) this
could be useful and easy to manage. But, what happens when the company
has several DevOps teams around the world? How can they ensure a maximum
code/knowledge resuse across the organization?

We have seen companies facing the same problem with different solutions
due to the lack of cross-organizational transparent and collaborative
methodology.

The World of Silos
------------------

In some cases, there is a corporate head or central unit that decides
the technology for the rest of business units. When these business units
adopt the technology, they usually need to customize it, ending with
something slightly different to the orginal product. While the central
unit evolves its product in their “closed silo”, the other units are
probably doing the same in their “silos”. The result? The adoption of
any update of the “core product” is a nightmare.

In other cases, business units behave as independent companies. Each one
use their own IT architecture, ending with an inefficient management of
resources caused by multiplication of technologies, developments, etc.

Even if the companies have adopted a “DevOps culture”, the lack of
shared source code and knowledge infrastructure, with a clear governance
model that allow people form the company to contribute to it is the main
issue in these cases, creating a “Silos Culture”.

Collaborative development in Open Source world has been used several
times as an example of how these methodologies can break silos between
companies that might be even market competitors. If competitors can
collaborate to build technology in which their business rely on, why
could not corporate business units do the same if they have corporate
succes as mission?

The start-ups bubble
--------------------

Many people might discuss if we are living an “start-ups bubble” or not,
but we are clearly surrounded by news about how a group of few people go
from a garage to a multinational company in a few years through
investment rounds.

Our experience tell us that opening offices abroad is always a
challenge, and managing development teams growing that fast can be a
serious problem.

The lack of effective and transparent communication channels and
documented procedures, might make harder any new employee on-boarding
and to be engage with the company.

On the other hand, recently created companies have been born taking
advantage of the existing IT solutions to provide omnichannel services.
They are used to work under “DevOps culture” and it might be easier for
them to adopt a common cross-organizational methodology that allow
transparency and collaboration.

Disengagement at work
---------------------

If previous scenarios are familiar to you, probably you don’t feel
engage at work. Don’t worry, you are not alone. According to World
Economic Forum [^5] 70% of employees say they are disengaged at work.

In the same article, it says that “Research from the University of
California found that motivated employees were 31% more productive, had
37% higher sales, and were three times more creative than demotivated
employees. They were also 87% less likely to quit, according to a
Corporate Leadership Council study on over 50,000 people”.

Towers Watson[^6] found that companies with engaged employees produced
19.2% more operative incomes in one year, but companies with worse
engagement operative incomes get reduced by 32.7%.

Adopting OSS development principles
-----------------------------------

Briefing, there are several scenarios found in companies with an strong
IT factor:

-   “Silos Culture” avoiding cross-organizational transparency

-   Inefficient resources management

-   Disengagement at work

By adopting OSS development principles, companies are adopting:

-   Governance model with policies to manage their projects under a
    collaborative methodology

-   Transparent communication channels to break silos

-   Meritocracy for developers, creating the “contributor role”

-   New roles for project managers, empowering their soft skills for
    people/community management

These principles will help the companies on:

-   Effective resources management, with better code/knowledge reuse
    accross the different units

-   Faster technology innovations/improvements, since the code is
    developed collaboratively and transparently by interested people and
    units

-   Empowered employees, increasing engagement by letting them to be
    part of companies development roadmap

-   Higher inner-innovation, by allowing employees to propose new ideas
    implementation based on company’s technology/knowledge

Adopting OSS development principles inside your company is the main
definition for Inner Source or Inner Sourcing. If you have already
decided, or have started to adopt Inner Source in your company, this
book will provide you some insights about how you can track the status
of your path.

“Collecting data is only the first step toward wisdom, but sharing data
is the first step toward community.” – Henry Lewis Gates (professor at
Harvard):

[^1]: https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424053111903480904576512250915629460

[^2]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x7ozaFbqg00

[^3]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Omnichannel

[^4]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DevOps

[^5]: https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/11/70-of-employees-say-they-are-disengaged-at-work-heres-how-to-motivate-them/

[^6]: http://www.towerswatson.com/DownloadMedia.aspx?media=%7B1EBA6F1E-B1E7-4F0A-A9F7-D828C4D8B2AE%7D
